README.md, before:

## **Data-Science-Project**
## **Group 6 Members**

---

### *Ma Estela Arenas*
### *Sean Howman*
### *Yuxiao Liu*
### *Feng Nie*

---

1.0 Business Understanding 

It has often been observed that energy consumption tends to be at its highest on days with hotter temperatures. In this project, our group will develop models that predict the maximum daily energy usage and pricing category based on provided weather data. The hope is that these models can be used to predict likely energy demands based on a weather forecast, which can help energy companies understand plan for future usage, and help businesses plan when to conduct energy-intensive operations.

2.0 Data Mining 

Data sets provided were weather_data.csv with 243 rows and 21 columns, has blanks and columns with both float and string, and price_demand_data.csv with 11,664 rows and 4 columns. 

3.0 Data Cleaning 

     3.1 Changes Made

Some data cleaning has been done on weather data.
Data cleaning on Price table, VIC column deleted, convert time into date format and then format into string format MM-dd,a,HH:mm. so that later on, we can easily grab the date and time. convert demand to INT, as the floating point number is not that important. No change to the pricing category, all data there are looking great.
The reason I kept the AM/PM data is because there are separate temperature data on the weather table, and have yet decided its relatedness.

Domain Knowledge *https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014098832200189X*

• Temperature has robust and flat effects on electricity demand across all periods.
• Rain and sunshine have greater potential to affect people’s consumption behaviour.
• Sunshine sensitivity increases from late afternoon and peaks in early evening.
• More rain-sensitive activities occur before mid-afternoon during weekdays.
• In the mornings, sunlight has positive effects on weekend consumptions.
- As the above example shows, there is no point to keep any data which are NOT Rain, Sunshine or Temperature related. Please see the cleaned weather data.

     3.2 Assumptions

There were missing data on row 190 for date 07/08/2021. The minimum, maximum and 9 am temperature will be the same as the given 3 pm temperature     which is 12oC. Rainfall is assumed to be 0 mm. 

     3.3 Limitations

Date range used in this project is between 1st of January and 31st of August 2021. Demand usage is within the 30-minute time interval daily. 


4.0 Data Exploration – form hypothesis about your defined problem by visually analyzing the data 


5.0 Feature Engineering – select important features and construct more meaningful ones using the raw data that you have

Model 1 Goal: Predict the maximum daily energy usage based on provided weather data
Get the highest usage per 30 min row (one row only) to represent the max daily usage for the day

- independent variable: temperature 
- dependent variable: maximum daily energy usage

Model 2 Goal – Predict the maximum daily price category based on provided weather data
Get the price category based on the highest category for the day (example if we have 41 low, 0 med, 7 high we will choose HIGH)

- independent variable: temperature 
- dependent variable: maximum daily price category

6.0 Predictive Modelling – train machine for learning models, evaluate their performance, and use them to make prediction

- linear regression = demand prediction
- classification = price prediction

7.0 Data Visualisation – communicate the findings with key stakeholders using plots and interactive visualisations

Commit message:

Modify the read me file about the method of data cleaning

README.md, after:

## **Data-Science-Project**
## **Group 6 Members**

---

### *Ma Estela Arenas*
### *Sean Howman*
### *Yuxiao Liu*
### *Feng Nie*

---

1.0 Business Understanding 

It has often been observed that energy consumption tends to be at its highest on days with hotter temperatures. In this project, our group will develop models that predict the maximum daily energy usage and pricing category based on provided weather data. The hope is that these models can be used to predict likely energy demands based on a weather forecast, which can help energy companies understand plan for future usage, and help businesses plan when to conduct energy-intensive operations.

2.0 Data Mining 

There are 2 available data sets, weather_data.csv contains key weather indicators, such as minimum and miximum temperatres for the city of Melbourne for each day between January and August 2021, which covers 243 rows and 21 columns. It has blanks and features in both float and string format. The other dataset is price_demand_data.csv, which contains energy price and demand figures for the state of Victoria for each half hour period between January and August 2021, covering 11,664 rows and 4 columns.


3.0 Data Cleaning 

3.1 Changes Made
Simple observation of dataset:
The weather_data.csv contains 243 rows, 6 rows contain several blank celss across various columns, the price_demand_data.csv is pretty consistance. 

Potential 3 ways to clean the data:
1. Delete the 6 rows in the weather_data.csv directly, which just occupy 2.5% of the weather_data.
2. Use simple imputation method to fill the blank cells in weather_data.
3. Analysis the correlation between each columns of weather_data, fill the blank cells either by correlation regression analysis, or domain knowledge, also can be average of closed several days.

Above 3 cleaning methods data would result 3 dataset for model learning. The prediction result would be compared between different cleaned data feed in.



Some data cleaning has been done on weather data.
Data cleaning on Price table, VIC column deleted, convert time into date format and then format into string format MM-dd,a,HH:mm. so that later on, we can easily grab the date and time. convert demand to INT, as the floating point number is not that important. No change to the pricing category, all data there are looking great.
The reason I kept the AM/PM data is because there are separate temperature data on the weather table, and have yet decided its relatedness.

Domain Knowledge *https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014098832200189X*

• Temperature has robust and flat effects on electricity demand across all periods.
• Rain and sunshine have greater potential to affect people’s consumption behaviour.
• Sunshine sensitivity increases from late afternoon and peaks in early evening.
• More rain-sensitive activities occur before mid-afternoon during weekdays.
• In the mornings, sunlight has positive effects on weekend consumptions.
- As the above example shows, there is no point to keep any data which are NOT Rain, Sunshine or Temperature related. Please see the cleaned weather data.

     3.2 Assumptions

There were missing data on row 190 for date 07/08/2021. The minimum, maximum and 9 am temperature will be the same as the given 3 pm temperature     which is 12oC. Rainfall is assumed to be 0 mm. 

     3.3 Limitations

Date range used in this project is between 1st of January and 31st of August 2021. Demand usage is within the 30-minute time interval daily. 


4.0 Data Exploration – form hypothesis about your defined problem by visually analyzing the data 


5.0 Feature Engineering – select important features and construct more meaningful ones using the raw data that you have

Model 1 Goal: Predict the maximum daily energy usage based on provided weather data
Get the highest usage per 30 min row (one row only) to represent the max daily usage for the day

- independent variable: temperature 
- dependent variable: maximum daily energy usage

Model 2 Goal – Predict the maximum daily price category based on provided weather data
Get the price category based on the highest category for the day (example if we have 41 low, 0 med, 7 high we will choose HIGH)

- independent variable: temperature 
- dependent variable: maximum daily price category

6.0 Predictive Modelling – train machine for learning models, evaluate their performance, and use them to make prediction

- linear regression = demand prediction
- classification = price prediction

7.0 Data Visualisation – communicate the findings with key stakeholders using plots and interactive visualisations
